Hugo, I would love if you told
us a little about your life story,
how you started doing business,
what companies you participated
in, what have been your greatest
successes, or what you are proud of.
Well, starting a little with the process,
my family, both my grandfather, both
my other grandfather, my mother have
always been entrepreneurs,
in one way or another, and that I think
I have lived it and I have been
able to keep it silent throughout
my life since I was a little boy.
That was reflected, for example, when
I was in school and I was 13,
that the truth that I only had
were the 100 pessetas or 200 pessetas
that I gave to take a snack, a
bowl, because I decided I
wanted to have something more
of money and do something
of business.
So what I started doing was getting
silk worms to sell them to
all my classmates, college-
mates and so on, and it was
a pretty profitable business
and it didn't bring me
much trouble.
At the beginning of that,
already at college, well, we did
some business and so, any, and then
at the university I met Felix and
then, a friend of Felix had the idea
of creating Twenty, and there I
could be involved, I could
be a partner, then what happens
is that, one way or another, I
decided to go to London to finish
my studies and I wasn't working
at Twenty as such.
That's what brought me a little into
the world of entering the world
of startups.
Then we created a copycat of Groupon,
which at that time, in 2009, was something
of super-media and an incredible success
in the United States, we decided to
create it with the perfect timing
and with the leverage of Twenty,
and the reality is that when
we launched it was an impressive
success, we had a team, theoretically,
pretty good, and as a project
that is created in the perfect timing
with, supposedly, the right
people, does not triumph for
series of sizes.
I like to say that because, at the
end of the day, everyone believes that
here everyone is successful and behind
successes there are always failures.
That was one of our
failures.
I think you sold the first day.
Well, in fact, the first day we launched,
I think they sold, I don't remember
if they were, like 4,000 or
5,000 cards cards of Carlos Sainz,
I don't know if it was an approximate
turnover of 90,000 euros, launch,
we believe that, look, that was
one of the releases we said,
this will be a much bigger success
than Twenty, and then, as in
the end, not surrounding yourself
with the best of such a professional
team, or maybe not going to risk
with greater strength, for not
having created a powerful sales
team, how can an idea that
is launched with success roughly
and that we ended up buying
Ferum, but for a non-
relevant amount.
In which provinces
did you participate?
Then, later, I went to New York,
and New York what did me, is
that I went to work on a
backdrop in a time of crisis,
a time in which New York was
not easy for me, but that made
me completely change the mentality
I had, more Spanish,
less risks, more quiet, of
thinking smaller, in
the little bit, and made
me think very big.
I thought, I met a lot of people
that I went to find there in the
life of New York, and I understood
that it is the same to create
a restaurant that you may probably
have to be in that restaurant
15 hours a day, that you may
think big, and instead of
creating a restaurant, because
the timing you will devote to
that business will be the same,
because at the end the time
is limited, they will be 12, 15,
20 hours a day, which are, but
you don't have more, and what
you will have to do
is surround yourself with an
amazing team, knowing to delegate,
which is super important,
and above all that is one thing
that I want to nuanced, is
that people believe, when
a business model sees, joder,
that's how he has done,
that's he knows everything,
he doesn't know everything,
he knows what'
Then apart from that, then I started
to be curious about going back
to work on my own, I saw that New
York was a good place to do so,
but there were complications as
well, because in the end it wasn't
my native country, and in the
end it needed much more money than
in Spain.
Then, finally, I thought,
to begin with, as I was within the
Internet ecosystem, I decided
to set up a strategic consultancy
for public financing, they were
times in which the start-
ups found no funding, neither
funds, nor people, nor
Friends and Family, nor, of course,
banks, because it was a
time of crisis, people did
not want to invest, I was afraid,
and it was a time in which,
in Spain, there were many
public aid with very good
conditions that could apply
companies of new creation,
and I decided to
set up that and come
to Spain.
It was a tough time, because my heart
wanted to be in New York, in that
city I dreamed of since I was a kid,
from the day I saw the movie Solo
at Home, in fact, I told my
mother, I am going to live there
and I am going to succeed
there, my mother laughs, I would
have nine years, I actually lived,
I don't know if I succeeded, but
at least what I am, is what came
after New York, it has been something
incredible for me.
I mounted the consultant and say
the strategic consultant, because,
in the end, people what they always
want and intend is to have the
business model, the best idea, is
that, of course, you had that best
idea, there is no better idea, there
is no better idea, what there
is is a very persistent execution,
very day-to-day, very constant, surround
yourself very well with the right
people, follow and follow, because
most of the we know as such,
as can be Amazon, as can be Airbnb,
as can be many, have pivoted,
that is, Amazon started being
an online bookstore, and
now, what is it?
Would anyone describe it as
an online bookstore?
Or would you describe it as an English
cut online?
Or is it going far beyond that?
I came, I created the company,
thank God, I had to move a lot, I
had to get millions, talk to
millions of entrepreneurs
who were starting with lots
of desire, but disappointed because
they didn't find funding,
in the end, I managed to
create an ecosystem, I managed
to finance approximately more
than 100 million euros in companies
through public aid and public
financing, and that's what
made me get back to illusion
and to start again
and start again.
As a result, with all those companies
I knew, I started investing with
what I was billing in the company,
I managed to invest in Cabify, a
company of great success, in which
it has been a clear example of execution,
because it has a much larger
competitor than he, which is
Uber, and has managed, with a clear
competitive advantage, giving
a great service, to create a gap
in Latin America, in Spain, obviously,
is a leading company, but
in Latin America, for example,
is the second in most countries,
but grows month by month,
above a 30%, as far as
GMB, as regards revenue.
I also went to a
marketplace, why?
because I loved to know that
immediate is what is looking for
any user, who was Globo, invited
us the founder and...
I'm going to tell you because this
is curious, I think they were
calling me and I think it's
a Globe distributor.
No, we are going to follow.
A clear example of this is
that you clearly give a service
we need, you are now working,
we are here right now, you
don't have time to get the
thing you've asked for and
you have it here only with,
say, a click on the mobile.
Then, also, obviously, a very nice
story that I had, parallel,
when I saw in New York, Joppan Talent
was in trouble in 2012, it is
a company that has pivoted
a lot of model, and in 2012 I
decided, not for the business
model of that day, but for the
team that there was at Joppan
Talent, I decided to help them
go ahead.
That I did in a way, let's
say, strategic, vision, and
also achieving...
Basically, the money was
lost, what happens is that
for me there is no money lost
if you trust the people behind
them, they had a lot of illusion,
they still have a lot of
passion, which is something
fundamental to take your
project forward.
Finally, it was able to make a
relatively beautiful story with many
problems on the way, and for me
it has been one of the companies
that has most marked me at that
stage, because it is what made
me live and feel that any critical
situation of any company,
no matter how much it has, can
come forward and can be a
rotating success story.
I went on, I got involved in De Port
Village, I am in the board, I
also invested in that company, it
is a company, a vertical sports
company, it is a company that is
virtually the second, third company
in southern Europe, Spain, France,
Italy and Spain, it is a company
that grows above 80% year-
on-year, and it is a company of
great success for Spain, it is
an e-commerce.
And finally came my challenge, one of
the most important in my life, that
was, we were, Felix and I, in fact,
on vacation, on the beach, and we were
thinking what company, he is President
at Joe Pantale, and what company
we could involve, and I involved
in the operative of the company,
that it was very good company
in Spain, or that we liked
very much, with a lot of potential,
and that it had something
special.
And finally we believed that Hawkers
was a very special company, very difficult
to enter, because we didn't
know the companies involved,
we finally managed to have a relationship
and a bond of union, and we decided
to do a great operation with Hawkers,
raise all the capital of a large
Spanish round, for, above all,
we wanted to give a blow to
the table in Spain, and say that
in Spain you can do operations
at the level of the United States,
we return to that thanks to my
stage in New York, I could think
big, and that not only could you
do small things in Spain,
I am involved in the operative
of Hawkers, and it's a
wonderful adventure
Hawkers, which I'll tell later
in more detail.
You have said before that it is impossible
to have only successes, and you have
given an example, but the reality
is that you have demonstrated
an exceptional orphanage, because projects
that triumph over projects that
fail, there are very few, and you
have had the luck, but not luck
probably, to give with several
of the great successes.
So I would like it very much, I think
it is very enriching, if you told
us what you are looking at, how you
analyze a company, what you are looking
at, whether they are metric people,
I don't know, to invest or not
to invest.
Well, depending on the stage of the business,
I fix myself on some variables or other,
that is, in a company that you
will be mounting from the start, obviously
there are no metrics, I fix myself
if there is capacity for the market,
so that it is a big business,
then, on the other hand,
I fixed a lot...
I'm going to take a look, right?
The size of the market.
The size of the market is fundamental,
at least for me, and that's what
I need to know if so.
Second, the idea, the business you
want to build, is creating real
added value, that is, is there a
real competitive advantage?
That is, there are some shortcomings
in that sector, in which you want to
mount it, that you can cover by
doing it better, with many fewer resources
than your competitors, because
they are much bigger, yes or no?
If the answer is yes at that
moment, it is when what I do is try
to surround myself with the best
team, the best team, and in the
end that choice is what will mark
your company.
Then there is another
important thing, which I always
ask, is timing.
I will give you a simple example so that
you can see it clearly.
If you understand that instead of
having been mounted in 2004, when Facebook
had not yet arrived in Spain, if it
had been mounted in 2008, I don't know
it scientifically, but I can assure
you that probably, in
a very high percentage, it would
not have been successful.
Timing is also important.
I love it, because you have said
four factors that are key, market
size, value creation, because
there is a problem that has not
yet been solved, and in addition,
not only that it resolves a
problem, but also that it resolves
a problem with certain competitive
advantages, in a more efficient
way than current solutions
or whatever.
We said team, the third leg,
and the fourth you said timing.
I think it is a good summary of
the four factors to analyze for...
So that's what in a first stage,
sit or create, is a bit of what
I look at or what I want to do,
if I run it from the investor
side, if I'm going to invest.
And then, from the more growth
part, let's say I look at those four
variables, and then I would add a more
quantitative part, which would
be, say, metrics, KPIs and so on.
And as for KPIs metrics, if you tell
me which are the most relevant,
it depends a lot on which
sector we are in.
For example, if we are in a marketplace,
because the cohorts is something
that fixed me very much, the cohorts,
then I fixed very much on the repetition
ratio, because at the end of the
day, today it is very well that
many companies that what they
do is a lot of investment in marketing,
you have a few metrics, for
example, of downloads very
large, but then your product
is not used.
So what does that mean?
It is worth nothing.
They just try it, try it and it doesn't
work.
Example of companies in which
it has large metrics, having
compared with many of the same
sector or different marketplace,
has a very large recurrence
rate, or Lobo has a very
large recurrence rate.
From village, as it is an
e-commerce, for example, I fix more
on the lifetime value, how
much I cost to buy, acquire a user,
and in lifetime value, how much
at the end I am getting out.
It depends very much on
repetition, and it always depends
on the creation of user value.
Of the repetition, or also in this
case it may be that the purchase is
very high.
No is?
Then, for example, depending
on the sectors, you fix yourself more
in all that has talked to you, if
then we are in front of a new disruptive
idea that really does not
exist in the market, that is, you did
not have it in Spain, it is true
that there were events in the past
that were badly executed, or
that it really did not fill the
needs of the user, such as
high five, etc., because you fix yourself
a little more in your intuition.
In your intuition, if you really
believe that there will be a space
for that product, if you really
like people, and I tell you that
it can be a smell, it can be
more intuition, it can be a
need that I see, try to see
it for the mass of people, etc.,
but there is little more
you can see.